ESC Secrets Rotation Blog (#14088)
pulumi/docs: content/blog/esc-rotated-secrets-launch/index.md

- **Auditing and Tracking**: Gain complete visibility into credential usage, including a full history of generated credentials, active credentials, and the principals accessing them. This enhances governance and simplifies compliance.
- **Admin and Creator Control**: Admins and creators/writers of rotated secrets can configure rotations using privileged user credentials and keep those credentials private while ensuring the consumers can still consume the resulting rotated secrets. This provides a clear separate of concern for administration and individual usage. 
- **Configure [webhooks](/docs/esc/environments/webhooks/) for automation**: Notify teams, trigger custom workflows, or trigger a [Pulumi Deployment](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/) to update your [IaC stacks](/docs/iac/concepts/stacks/) whenever rotations occur, ensuring dependent teams and systems are updated on a timely basis

With Today’s launch, we support AWS IAM user credential rotation with many more databases and cloud integrations on the way. 

> ## How to Use ESC Rotated Secrets

Reviewer: Does it make sense to create a small pulumi program that creates the required resources for demo?  We could create the iam user, the managing role, and use the pulumi-service provider to create the two esc environments that reference them...

Author: If we can. We can say, "if you are a Pulumi IaC user, you can configure all of them using the example program linked. "

Reviewer 2: Related, thoughts on whether we can write a policy that will find existing secrets that don't have a rotation policy attached to them?

Reviewer: here is a rough draft of a demo program: https://github.com/pulumi/esc-examples/pull/4/commits/b12ffd6cb39750dc5253f8e19020030e8c4a5ac4

Reviewer: > Related, thoughts on whether we can write a policy that will find existing secrets that don't have a rotation policy attached to them?

I was led to believe you had volunteered to write one! 😉 

I think we should be able to do it.  We're going to extend the rotator to add a tag to the user it manages, which might be a way to cheat and make writing a policy easier... 🤔

Here’s how to configure [AWS IAM user](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_users.html) rotated secrets using best practices:

#### 1. Provision an AWS IAM User on your AWS Console 
[Create an AWS IAM user](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/IAM/latest/UserGuide/id_users_create.html) whose access keys you want to rotate.

#### 2. Create a new environment with managing user credentials

> In the example environment `credentials/aws-creds` below, we use the ESC’s [aws-login provider](/docs/esc/integrations/dynamic-login-credentials/aws-login/) using OIDC. This credential configured has the privileged access to be able to rotate the IAM user credentials. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example environment `credentials/aws-creds` below, we use the ESC’s [aws-login provider](/docs/esc/integrations/dynamic-login-credentials/aws-login/) using OIDC. This credential was configured with the privileged access to be able to rotate the IAM user credentials. 

The minimal permissions the managing credential requires are IAM List, Create, and DeleteAccessKeys over the IAM user you created.
```

<!--more-->

## The Challenge with Static Secrets: A Ticking Time Bomb

Traditional secrets management often relies on static, long-lived credentials. This approach creates several critical problems:

- **Increased Attack Surface**: The longer a secret remains unchanged, the greater the chance it will be compromised through accidental exposure, phishing attacks, or insider threats.
- **Manual, Error-Prone Rotation**: Manual rotation processes are time-consuming and require significant coordination across teams. A single mistake can lead to application downtime or even data breaches.
- **Inconsistent Practices**: Ad-hoc scripts and manual procedures often lead to inconsistent rotation policies, making it difficult to enforce security best practices across the organization.
- **Compliance Headaches**: Many compliance regulations (like SOC 2, GDPR, and HIPAA) require regular secret rotation. Manual processes make it difficult to demonstrate compliance and can lead to costly penalties.

> These challenges are amplified in complex, multi-cloud, hybrid, or on-premises environments where secrets are distributed across numerous systems. Organizations need a better way – a solution that automates the process, minimizes risk, and integrates seamlessly with their existing workflows.

Reviewer 2: (I now see you have a section on that - great - I would just pull a mention of it up sooner.)

> These challenges are amplified in complex, multi-cloud, hybrid, or on-premises environments where secrets are distributed across numerous systems. Organizations need a better way – a solution that automates the process, minimizes risk, and integrates seamlessly with their existing workflows.

Author: Updated in the latest commit

- **Auditing and Tracking**: Gain complete visibility into credential usage, including a full history of generated credentials, active credentials, and the principals accessing them. This enhances governance and simplifies compliance.
- **Admin and Creator Control**: Admins and creators/writers of rotated secrets can configure rotations using privileged user credentials and keep those credentials private while ensuring the consumers can still consume the resulting rotated secrets. This provides a clear separate of concern for administration and individual usage. 
- **Configure [webhooks](/docs/esc/environments/webhooks/) for automation**: Notify teams, trigger custom workflows, or trigger a [Pulumi Deployment](/docs/pulumi-cloud/deployments/) to update your [IaC stacks](/docs/iac/concepts/stacks/) whenever rotations occur, ensuring dependent teams and systems are updated on a timely basis

> With Today’s launch, we support AWS IAM user credential rotation with many more databases and cloud integrations on the way. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With today’s launch, we support AWS IAM user credential rotation with many more databases and cloud integrations on the way. 
```

Reviewer 2: Do we want to link to a GitHub issue here, where folks can upvote for providers they'd like to see?

Author: Adding in new version

#### 6. Schedule Rotations
Now that you’ve correctly configured your rotated secrets, set up an automated rotation schedule from the Secrets Rotation tab. 

**Add GIF**

## Rotated Secrets vs. Dynamic Credentials: Choosing the Right Tool

Pulumi ESC offers both [Dynamic Secrets](/docs/esc/integrations/dynamic-login-credentials/) and Rotated Secrets. While both enhance security, they serve different purposes:

- **Dynamic Secrets**: These are short-lived, ephemeral credentials with a Time-To-Live (TTL) typically ranging from 1 to 8 hours. A new set of credentials is generated every time the environment is opened. This is ideal for minimizing the impact of compromised credentials, as they quickly become invalid.
- **Rotated Secrets**: These are longer-lived credentials, potentially lasting for days, weeks, or even months. The same, latest credential is returned every time the environment is opened until the next scheduled rotation occurs. This provides stability and predictability for applications that need consistent credentials over a longer period.

> Here are scenarios where rotated secrets are the preferred choice:

Reviewer 2: I would probably mention Legacy Apps as a choice. In many cases, an app was written a long time ago, and can't be easily rewritten to support dynamic secrets. Although the below reasons are "correct," I would wager money that Legacy Apps is actually the #1 reason folks may choose rotated secrets. It's just easier to wedge in rotated secrets, and get an improvement to your security footprint, than it is to redesign/rearchitect an entire app.

Author: updating in new copy
